---
layout: post
title:  "On the Pomodoro Technique vs the Stopwatch"
categories: time-management pomodoro technique
tags: time-management productivity pomodoro 
---

The well-known Pomodoro Technique provides a simple way to structure one's time. I have found it very helpful in staying focused on a single task. It provides a mental box, which allows one to ignore distractions.

The most challenging part of adopting this technique was finding a suitable tool for measuring time. I tried various mobile and desktop applications, browser extensions, as well as fitness trackers with timers. They worked well at first. They helped me develop a sense of the appropriate work interval duration of 25 minutes. I thought it was perfect for me.

Unfortunately, not all activities fit neatly into the predefined 25-minute interval. Sometimes one needs to finish writing an insightful idea, but the timer indicates that it is time for a break. There are two ways to handle such a case: continue writing, which makes the break shorter, or follow the Pomodoro rules and take the break, hoping to remember the important idea. The second option usually ruins the break by forcing me to hold the idea in my memory. This makes it impossible to relax and reset my mind.

Another situation arises when an activity reaches its logical conclusion, but there are still a couple of working minutes to spare. Again, should one shift the break, or start working on something new that would be interrupted almost immediately?

In both cases I think more about what to do with my work than about the work itself. I must judge whether it is acceptable to start a break sooner or later, whether it is fine to forget my thoughts, or whether I should start concentrating on the next idea if there are only two minutes left.

Managing a time-management tool carries an operational cost. The fancier the timer is, the higher the cost becomes. Consider the use of different tags, names, colours, and durations. Additional navigation through the application interface, skipping ads, and the need to unlock the phone can be overwhelming. It seems to me, though this may be personal, that with a dedicated Pomodoro tool the cost is sometimes too high.

What I have discovered recently is that a simple stopwatch app suits me perfectly. By starting the stopwatch and pressing the lap button at the end of each activity cycle, I decrease the mental overhead of fitting into the strict time block.

The use of a stopwatch also simplifies the tracking of new activities that have unknown durations. For example, while in Pomodoro mode, if I get distracted by some urgent activity, there is no need to think about what to do: pause the tracker and lose the record of time spent on the urgent activity, or start a new cycle. I simply start a new lap on the stopwatch and later I am able to restore and analyse the duration of my activities.

By analysing the activity-break cycles I start to understand my personal optimal cycle duration better. Some cycles are dynamic; they depend on the type of activity. Reading a work of fiction requires less energy and can easily last for an hour without a break. In this case I like to make a pause after the chapter and check the time spent and reading speed, then to decide about a break or switch to a different activity. 

The case is different when learning a new framework. Grasping a new concept requires much more energy. It feels natural to take a short pause after a new concept is learned, and learning cycles become shorter.

I am not suggesting that one should mark a lap after every paragraph, but sometimes this is exactly what one needs. Compared to the Pomodoro Technique, marking time for each paragraph gives me more visibility of my progress and state of mind. I can see when I slow down and make adjustments: rest more, refocus, or drink tea.

With the Pomodoro Technique, I would still take short breaks after each paragraph, trying to fit a full paragraph into the 25-minute block. The difference is that at the end I wouldn't have detailed information about my learning speed and would be more tired because of the need to adjust to the strict Pomodoro timer.

Consider the following examples of activity cycles: 25, 5, 25, 5, 25, 5, 25, 30 to 17, 23, 24, 3, 30. The latter tells the story: hard start, then picked up the pace and stayed focused (23, 24). At the end of 24 I realised that I had worked enough and it was time for a break. During the break I analysed the work and returned to writing in 3 minutes to keep the new idea alive in my head instead of forcing myself to sit for up to five minutes and losing the inspiration.

Also, it is much easier to start over. Just press the reset button and a new cycle can begin. No overhead, no need to name your activities in sophisticated time-trackers. If the activity is really important, I'll find a way to write and track my progress. It can be a work log dedicated to this activity. Next time it could be my tasks board, etc. The point is that it should be flexible.

When I use a single time-tracking app and a new activity doesn't fit my usual workflow, more time is spent on thinking about new tags or task groups, instead of just starting the new focused session with the stopwatch.

The purpose of the Pomodoro Technique is to ensure that enough quality time (focused, without distractions) is dedicated to the activity. With a stopwatch I have the same capability with less mental overhead and more flexibility, benefiting from the fine-grained time tracking for further analysis and self-reflection. This also improves memory: it's fun to look at a set of laps and recreate the events that took place at each lap.

In summary, I suggest skipping the frustration of picking the best-fitting Pomodoro tracker, learning how to use it, thinking about the perfect work-break balance, naming, tagging, sorting, grouping, metrics and so on. Just start your default stopwatch and make sure to spend at least 15 minutes before the first break. Let habit take care of the rest. After some time, the perfect cycle per activity will be discovered and will help with future estimations and adjustments of work activities.
